Document model and flow of metering data for billing (#79)
appuio/appuio-io-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/architecture/metering-data-flow.adoc

  However, if run again with a different configuration, the results reflect the changes made.
  This ensures that errors in the past can easily be fixed.
* Time aware configuration
  Every configuration with the power to change the output, is made time aware.
  This means that this config has timestamps attached denoting from when and until when that config is valid.

== System idea

This is an https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extract,_transform,_load[ETL process].
The extract and load part are well isolated and have only a dependency to their source/target system.
The transform part on the other hand needs to bring parts of both the source and the target togehter.
Instead of having one single ETL process, a multi stage model with an intermediate persistence will be used.
The first stage fetches the data from the source into that intermediate storage.
The second stage enriches that data by bringing in missing pieces from the target system.
The third stage then ingests the data into the target system.
This is done to keep this loosely coupled and thus simplify writing and maintaining the code base.
It also allows to easily replace the code that talks to the target system.

> We take into account ease of replacing for code that talks to the target system to accommodate replacing the billing/ERP system and reselling of {product}.

Reviewer: I agree that the data extraction and the ingestion into the external system should be as decoupled as possible. I'm not sure they are in this proposal. (If I understood it correctly) All three stages communicate directly through a shared database and the database contains target specific data.

What if for example the target systems id is not actually an int but a string? Or it's in another way not directly map-able?

I would suggest the ingestion is done by a completely different system and talks to the data extraction system through a clearly defined API (Databases are IMO a terrible API)

Reviewer 2: Yes, during discussions I've also made the suggestion to go via API and not shared database. Atm, we are considering starting with shared database to get experience with the data model before we start designing an API that would constantly change while we collect experience.

Reviewer: I don't see the advantage of a "constantly changing" shared database model compared to a "constantly changing" API.

Many aspects of how this system works are expected to change over time.
For example, the price for a given product and any discounts are valid only for a defined time window.
The system deals with them by assigning timestamps to those data records.
The timestamp `from` denotes the earliest point in time that records becomes valid.
The timestamp `until` denotes the lates point in time that record was valid.
If either is left blank, that record is unbound in that direction.
So a record can be made valid from the beginning up until a certain time, while an other becomes valid up until further notice from that time on.

> The system needs to implement constraints and validations to ensure that no overlapping time ranges can be defined.

Reviewer: It also needs to make sure if they are modified the affected facts are recomputed. The same needs to happen if we add discounts or products. This also means the whole matching logic below needs to be reapplied.

Author: > Do we really have the performance requirements that we need to pre-compute this

I did some tests and yes, we do have the requirements. See #83 for details.

Author: > I would argue in data extraction and data ingestion are quite tightly coupled by communicating through a database.

Coupling can be discussed based different aspects. I am more concerned about the coupling in the business logig. Splitting it up, allows to reduce the complexity of each individual piece. By my understanding, this makes them easier to write, test and maintain.

As for the coupling though the database, I see this as a form of API. I have concidered to have this wrapped in a HTTP or similar API. However that would be a lot of additional work with questionable benefit.

Identifiers on the source and the target system are not nessesarily the same.
On the source, the billing entity might be identified by the string `acme-corp`.
While on the target, that same billing entity might be identifed by the integer `42`.
In order to bring those two worlds together, the intermediate storage contains lookup tables holding both, the source and the target identifiers.

It often happens that the same product gets sold at different prices and discounts can be granted in general or for a given time period.
Also, the scope can variy.
Maby a billing entity gets a different price but only for a specific instance of a product.
A discount might be granted to everybody for a given time period or only to a single billing entity.
In order to support this — and even more constelation — the source and target matching gets used.

On the source, all relevant information is available as labels (dimesnions) on a timeseries.

> The query extracting that data, then concatenates those dimensions in to a source identifier for a product or a discount.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The query extracting the data from the source concatenates those dimensions into a source identifier for a product or a discount.
```

> Finding a matching record in the intermediate storage is then a multi step process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After that, finding a matching record in the intermediate storage is a multi step process:
```

> First, the whole string will be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, the full identifier is looked up in the intermediate storage.
```

> If no record could be found, then one segment gets dropped from the end.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If no record is found for the full identifier, one segment gets dropped from the end.
```

> The process is then repeated until a record is found or only one segment is left.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This lookup process is repeated until a record is found or only one segment is left.
```

> If the last segment is reached without a record found, a record will be created.

Reviewer 3: Is the new record created for only the first segment or the full identifier here?

```suggestion
If the last segment is reached without finding an existing record, a new record will be created.
```

Discounts and products are timed objects.

.Examples
****
The following assumes the source contains metrics about workload in a Kubernetes namespace named _curly-snow-5598_.
The billing entity is denoted by a label named `tenant_id` with the value _acme-corp_.

> There is also a label `cluster_id` to denote the cluster where that workload runs which has the value _c-appuio-cloudsclae-lpg-2_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is also a label `cluster_id` to denote the cluster where that workload runs which has the value _c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2_.
```

The product that is billed is the used memory and is refered to as _appuio_cloud_memory_.

The source identifier for both the product and the discount would then be:

`appuio_cloud_memory:acme-corp:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2:curly-snow-5598`

> Following the above algorithm, there could now be a product or discount records with the following source identifier:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Following the above algorithm, there could now be product or discount records with the following source identifiers:
```

* `appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2:ame-corp:curly-snow-5598`
   Applies to only that single namespace
* `appuio_cloud_memory:acme-corp:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2`
   Applies to all workload of that customer on that cluster.
* `appuio_cloud_memory:acme-corp`
   Applies to all workload of that customer.
* `appuio_cloud_memory`
   Applies to everything.

// TODO It could also make sense to apply somethig to all clusters for all customers `appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2`.
****

The system is supposed to handle different products.

> It is asumed, that the data required to bill one product, can be forumlated with a single PromQL query.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is assumed that the data required to bill one product can be formulated with a single PromQL query.
```

Queries are timed objects.

> Some items contain a name or descrption that is to be injested into the target system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some items contain a name or description that is to be ingested into the target system.
```

Some of those texts are supposed to be dynamic.
To enable this, they are treated as templates and the dynamic parts get inserted wile creating the records on the target system.

== Data model

image::system/data-model-billing.drawio.svg[]

[NOTE]
====
Using a https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_schema[star schema] seems to be the most logical choice.
However, it is not the only choice.
It can and has to be adapted according the the storage technology chosen for implementation.
====

At the center of the model is the fact.
A fact represents a sampled amount of something that is billed.
The fact can have the same sampling rate as its source.
It also can be an aggregation of a smaller sampling rate.
For ingestion into the taget, the fact will be aggregated to a single line item.
The value of the fact is the observed quantity to be billed.

> The query holds the PromQL query string used to generate fatcs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The query holds the PromQL query string used to generate facts.
```

It also holds meta data associated with the fact like the unit and the descrption to be shown for the line item on the invoice.
The descrption is a templated string.

The product holds the amount to be charged per unit.
Its source identifer is a segmented match as explained in <<System idea>>.
This is effectivly the price table.

The discount holds a percentage to be discounted.
Its source identifer is a segmented match as explained in <<System idea>>.

Category allows to group line items together.
Taking the example of {product}, a category is a namespace on a specific cluster.

> All billed items of that namespace, will be groupbed together on the resulting invoice.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All billed items of that namespace will be grouped together on the resulting invoice.
```

// TODO Dimension Item is not used for billing.
// It might come in handy for usage reporting in the UI should we choose to tap into this system for that purpse.

> == Data flow
> 
> == Query phase

Reviewer 2: Empty section or wrong section level? If wrong section level, there are more below, but i'm not going to mark them
```suggestion
== Data flow

=== Query phase
```

In the query phase, the Prometheus API gets queried and the results get written to the facts table.

> If records in the dimesnion tables are missing, they get created as needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If records in the dimension tables are missing, they get created as needed.
```

The created dimension records might be inclomplete.
They will get completed in the next phase.

From an orchestration perspective, a master job gets created in the desired interval.

> The master job looks at the query table and identify the queries that apply to the time window at hand.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The master job looks at the query table and identifies the queries that apply to the time window at hand.
```

> For each query, at job for that specific query gets started.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For each identified query, a job performing that query gets created.
```

> The query job then fetches the data from Prometheus and writes the results into the facts table.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each query job fetches the data from Prometheus and writes its results into the facts table.
```

> Table locking is required to prevent two query jobs running in paralell from creating the same dimension records.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Table locking is required to prevent two query jobs running in parallel from creating the same dimension records.
```

The exection intervals for this phase can be in the range of minutes, hours or maybe days.

== Enrichment phase

> The query phase potentially has created dimesnion records that are lacking information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The query phase potentially has created dimension records that are lacking information.
```

In the enrichment phase, one or several jobs communicate with the target system to get that missing data.

> This might result in create some helper records in the target system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's possible that this phase creates some helper records in the target system.
```

> For example to get a target id of a category, such a category might have to be created first in the target system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, in order to get a target id of a category, this category may have to be created in the target system first.
```

The exectuion interval for this phase can be less than the one of the query phase.
It must however run successfully at least once before the next phase can be run.

== Ingestion phase

> Here the actuall invoices and line items get created in the target system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here the actual invoices and line items get created in the target system.
```

> The exectuion interval for this phase can be less than the one of the query phase.
> It must however run successfully at least once before the next phase can be run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The execution interval for this phase can be less than the one of the query phase.
However, it must run successfully at least once before the next phase can be run.
```

This usually is run once after a billing period has concluded.
For example, at the beginning of a month to generate the invoices of the previous month.
Thanks to the enrichment phase, jobs in this phase can just query the intermediate storage and have all data available to create the invoices.

> Depending on the sample of the intermediate storage, aggregations must be made (sum all records for the requested month).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on the sample interval in the intermediate storage, aggregations must be made (sum all records for the requested month).
```

== Example

=== Initial state

.Dimension Query
|===
| id
| name
| description
| query
| unit

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory
| Compute (min: {{ .min }}, avg: {{ .avg }}, max: {{ .max }})
| …
| MiB
|===

.Dimension Product
|===
| id
| source
| target
| amount
| from
| until

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-1
| 0.0002248931
| null
| null
|===

.Dimension Discount
|===
| id
| source
| discount
| from
| until

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory
| 0
| null
| null
|===

In the target system, a record exists for a tenant with the id `22457`.

> That record has a field that contains the source referenc with the value `acme-corp`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That record has a field that contains the source reference with the value `acme-corp`
```

> All the other dimenstions are empty.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the other dimensions are empty.
```

== Query phase

[source, Prometheus query result]
----
{
  query="appuio_cloud_memory",
  tenant="acme-corp",
  category="c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2:curly-snow-5598",
  product="appuio_cloud_memory:acme-corp:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2:curly-snow-5598",
}
1035892736 1639040942
----

.Fact
|===
| date_time_id
| query_id
| tenant_id
| category_id
| product_id
| discount_id
| quantity

| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1035892736
|===

> .Dimesnion Date Time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Dimension Date Time
```

|===
| id
| timestamp
| year
| month
| day
| hour
| minute

| 1
| 1639040942
| 2021
| 12
| 09
| 10
| 09
|===

.Dimension Query
|===
| id
| name
| description
| query
| unit

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory
| Compute (min: {{ .min }}, avg: {{ .avg }}, max: {{ .max }})
| …
| MiB
|===

.Dimension Tenant
|===
| id
| source
| target

| 1
| acme-corp
| null
|===

> .Dimesnion Category

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Dimension Category
```

|===
| id
| source
| target

| 1
| c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2:curly-snow-5598
| null
|===

.Dimension Product
|===
| id
| source
| target
| amount
| from
| until

| 1

> | appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-1

Reviewer 3: Should this be lpg-2?

```suggestion
| appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2
```

| 18367
| 0.0002248931
| null
| null
|===

.Dimension Discount
|===
| id
| source
| discount
| from
| until

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory
| 0
| null
| null
|===

=== Enrichment phase

.Fact
|===
| date_time_id
| query_id
| tenant_id
| category_id
| product_id
| discount_id
| quantity

| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1
| 1035892736
|===

> .Dimesnion Date Time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Dimension Date Time
```

|===
| id
| timestamp
| year
| month
| day
| hour
| minute

| 1
| 1639040942
| 2021
| 12
| 09
| 10
| 09
|===

.Dimension Query
|===
| id
| name
| description
| query
| unit

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory
| Compute (min: {{ .min }}, avg: {{ .avg }}, max: {{ .max }})
| …
| MiB
|===

.Dimension Tenant
|===
| id
| source
| target

| 1
| acme-corp
| *22457*
|===

> .Dimesnion Category

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Dimension Category
```

|===
| id
| source
| target

| 1
| c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2:curly-snow-5598
| *19588*
|===

> To get the target category id, a category record was created at the target system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To get the target category id, a category record was created in the target system.
```

.Target Category
|===
| ID
| Description

| 19588
| Zone: cloudscale.ch - LPG 2, namespace: curly-snow-5598
|===

The target specific code has a way to parse the category source string and transform it to something that resembles the above example.

.Dimension Product
|===
| id
| source
| target
| amount
| from
| until

| 1

> | appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-1

Reviewer 3: Should this be lpg-2?

```suggestion
| appuio_cloud_memory:c-appuio-cloudscale-lpg-2
```

| 0.0002248931
| null
| null
|===

.Dimension Discount
|===
| id
| source
| discount
| from
| until

| 1
| appuio_cloud_memory
| 0
| null
| null
|===

=== Ingestion phase

The intermediate tables are no longer touched so they are left out for brevity.
The tables below are an example based on Odoo.

.Invoice
|===
| ID
| Partner ID
| Account ID
| Invoice Date
| Journal ID
| Name
| Payment Term
| State
| User ID

| 10730 (auto incremented primary key)

> | 22457 (the target from dimesnion tenant)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 22457 (the target from dimension tenant)
```

The master job looks at the query table and identifies the queries that apply to the time window at hand.
For each identified query, a job performing that query is created.

Each query job fetches the data from Prometheus and writes its results into the facts table.
If the facts table already contains results for the query job's query and timestamp, those records are updated or dropped and replaced with the new results.
Table locking is required to prevent two query jobs running in parallel from creating the same dimension records.

The execution interval for this phase is in the range of minutes, hours or possibly days.

== Enrichment phase

The query phase may have created dimension records that are incomplete.
In the enrichment phase, one or several jobs communicate with the target system to create or fetch any missing information in dimension records.
It's possible that this phase creates new records in the target system.
For example, in order to get the target id of a category, this category may need to be created in the target system first.

This phase doesn't necessarily need to be executed as frequently the <<_query_phase,query phase>>.

> However, the enrichment must be completed successfully at least once before the <<_ingestion_phase,ingestion phase>> can be run.

Reviewer 3: I think you wanted to indicate that enrichment doesn't need to run after every query, so I reworded this paragraph to make that much clearer. I find it hard to think about intervals as "less" or "more" and to an extent "larger" "smaller".
